.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md, before:

**What kind of change does this PR introduce? (Bug fix, feature, docs update, ...)**



**What is the current behavior? (You can also link to an open issue here)**



**What is the new behavior (if this is a feature change)?**



**Please check if the PR fulfills these requirements**
- [ ] The commit messages follow our guidelines: https://github.com/angular/angular.js/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#commit-message-format
- [ ] A unit test has been written for this change. Some examples can be found here: https://sqbu-github.cisco.com/WebExSquared/wx2-admin-web-client/tree/master/examples/unit
- [ ] Running `gulp build` produced a successful build. (Unit testing can be done by running `gulp karma`; end-to-end testing can be done by running `gulp e2e`.)
- [ ] My code has been beautified. (This is a gulp task run within `gulp build`, but can be run independently with `gulp jsBeautifier:beautify`.)


**Please provide a screenshot of this feature before and after your code changes, if applicable.**



**Other information**:

Commit message:

chore: update PR template for webpack change
The template for making pull requests was still referencing gulp commands, changing to use the new npm commands. From what I could see the build command no longer does beautifying but instead errors if there are unbeautified files.

.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md, after:

**What kind of change does this PR introduce? (Bug fix, feature, docs update, ...)**



**What is the current behavior? (You can also link to an open issue here)**



**What is the new behavior (if this is a feature change)?**



**Please check if the PR fulfills these requirements**
- [ ] The commit messages follow our guidelines: https://github.com/angular/angular.js/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#commit-message-format
- [ ] A unit test has been written for this change. Some examples can be found here: https://sqbu-github.cisco.com/WebExSquared/wx2-admin-web-client/tree/master/examples/unit
- [ ] Running `npm run build` produced a successful build. (Unit testing can be done by running `npm test`; end-to-end testing can be done by running `npm run e2e`.)
- [ ] My code has been beautified. (`npm run jsb` to do this. `npm run build` will fail if there are unbeautified files.)


**Please provide a screenshot of this feature before and after your code changes, if applicable.**



**Other information**:
